NASA's Crew-8 mission members return to Earth on SpaceX capsule
Updated October 25, 20241:58 PM ET 
By Chandelis Duster


NASA's Crew-8 mission members returned to Earth Friday — capping a nearly eight-month mission after their trip from the International Space Station was extended several times.

The SpaceX Dragon capsule carrying the four-member crew splashed down off the coast of Pensacola, Fla., just before 3:30 a.m. ET after a fiery nighttime return across southern Mexico.

Over about an hour, the capsule pierced the atmosphere with an orbital velocity of 17,500 mph and eventually eased to a leisurely 16 mph under a canopy of parachutes as it landed in the Gulf of Mexico. The capsule undocked from the space station Wednesday afternoon.

The Crew-8 members spent 235 days in space, the longest of any human SpaceX mission. Their spacecraft — Endeavour — set a duration record for a human-rated capsule: 701 days in orbit.

The crew included three NASA astronauts: commander Matthew Dominick, pilot Michael Barratt, and mission specialist Jeanette Epps. Cosmonaut Alexander Grebenkin of Roscosmos, Russia's space agency, was also part of this mission.

Several hours after the splashdown, NASA announced that all four members of the crew were taken to a hospital in Pensacola "for additional evaluation." In a series of statements, NASA said the crew exited the spacecraft onto a recovery ship for standard post-flight medical examinations and "additional evaluation of the crew members was requested out of an abundance of caution.”

This photo provided by NASA shows support teams working around the SpaceX Dragon Endeavour spacecraft shortly after it landed, in the Gulf of Mexico off the coast of Pensacola, Fla. on Friday.

The space agency says a NASA astronaut experienced a “medical issue” after the return. “After medical evaluation at the hospital, three of the crew members departed Pensacola and have arrived at NASA’s Johnson Space Center in Houston,” the statement said.

NASA says the one astronaut who remains at Ascension is “in stable condition under observation as a precautionary measure.” NASA has not released the name of the crew member to protect that person’s medical privacy and identity.

They lifted off into space on a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket on March 3, 2024, and spent more than seven months at the space station conducting scientific research, including on the shift of body fluids during spaceflight and how UV radiation and weightlessness affect plant growth.

During their time on the space station, Crew-8 members also became part of a record number of people orbiting Earth. When the Soyuz MS-26 spacecraft brought a NASA astronaut and two Russian cosmonauts to the station in September, there were a total of 19 people in orbit, including the astronauts on China's Tiangong space station.

The Crew-8 mission was supposed to end in August but was extended several times following problems during the test flight of Boeing's Starliner capsule.

Starliner, which carried two NASA astronauts, experienced thruster problems as it approached the space station in June. NASA determined it was too risky for the crew to return to Earth on board Starliner and flew the spacecraft back to Earth empty in September.

The two Crew-9 mission members, who arrived at the station in September, will bring back the NASA astronauts left by Starliner, Suni Williams and Butch Wilmore, at the completion of their mission, which is set to end in February 2025.

The return of Crew-8 was also delayed due to Hurricane Milton and unfavorable weather conditions at the splashdown sites off Florida over the past week.

NPR's Russell Lewis and Central Florida Public Media's Brendan Byrne contributed to this report.