2024 ELECTION

Come hell or high water, early voting is happening in storm-
ravaged North Carolina

OCTOBER 23, 2024: 5:20 PM ET
HEARD ON ALL THINGS CONSIDERED

Stephen Fowler


A woman holds a sample ballot on the second day of early voting at a polling station, Oct. 18, in Fairview, North
Carolina. Despite concerns about early voting access after Hurricane Helene, many local officials reported record
turnout for early voting, like in nearby Yancey County.


BURNSVILLE, N.C. — Mary Beth Tipton has two stickers on the wall in her office that sum up what it’s like being an elections official. One’s a smiling, flaming
cartoon dumpster that says in all caps: “IT’S FINE, I’M FINE, EVERYTHING’S
FINE.”

“The other one is a circus tent and it says ‘Ringmaster of the’... we'll just let people
take a guess... 'show’,” Tipton laughed.

She’s been the elections director in rural Yancey County, north of Asheville, for a
dozen years, including during the pandemic, and thought she'd seen it all. When
Hurricane Helene came in and devastated western North Carolina with torrential
flooding, everything changed.


Yancey County elections director Mary Beth Tipton's office sports a sticker of a smiling cartoon dumpster that
says, "It's fine, I'm fine, everything is fine," which has taken on extra meaning in recent weeks.


In the final countdown to Election Day, the presidential race is top of mind for
many Americans. But in Yancey County and across western North Carolina,
election season seems like a foreign concept for people left picking up the pieces.

Tipton said it was hard coming back into the office the first time after the storm,
but soon after she walked in, the phones started ringing off the hook.

There were questions about how to send a ballot to far-flung areas people
evacuated to. There were preparations to make and polling places to check on.
One building washed into the river and others were used for aid distribution and
sheltering.


On the first day of early voting last Thursday, voters showed up in record numbers
and Tipton quickly remembered why she was there.

“This is one normal thing I can give my voters, the ones that have lost everything,”
an emotional Tipton said during an early afternoon lull. “You wouldn't believe the
people that's come through here today that’s said, ‘I don't have a home, but they're
here to vote. This is one thing that we're not taking away from them. We're going to
see to it that they do get to vote.”

Mary Beth Tipton could not fathom returning to the elections office after the hurricane swept through North
Carolina, but has become energized by helping people cast their ballots in recent days.

There are 11 precincts in the county with various states of readiness for
November’s Election Day, with assistance from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and some distribution sites clearing out.

“I have requested six tents from FEMA, and what they'll do is they'll come in with
power generators, heat, Porta-Johns, it’s got a floor, it’s awesome,’ she said. “I
have to find a footprint of 60’ by 100, so that way we can set the tent up in these
areas where we don't have anything.”

How to campaign after a hurricane? You don’t

While there are Herculean efforts to make the voting process business as usual,
campaigning has taken a backseat for both parties and campaigns.

Driving through the main roads around Burnsville, the county seat, you see more
logos for aid groups like Samaritan’s Purse than candidate signs. Many that
weren't washed away in the storm were removed by locals not wanting politics to
be a focus.

Johnny Deyton is chair of the Yancey County Democrats, and said last week they
would normally be calling folks to remind them about early voting and offer rides
to the polls.

“The way it is now, we have no telephone service, no landlines in Yancey County
are operating,” he said. “And the older residents of this county don't believe in cell
phones, so we're having a tough time communicating.”

What little communication that has made it through has focused more on making
sure people are safe, fed, and taken care of.

“We vote 70-75% of the population .. the registered voters will be lucky to get
within 60%,” he said. “Because people do have more concerns than voting, you
know? They're still without power, still have a tough time getting around.”


Johnny Deyton is a lifelong resident of Yancey County and chair of the local Democratic Party. He knows almost all
of his neighbors who died after Helene, and says turnout across the board will be lower this year.

Deyton is a lifelong local with ties to the community that are stronger than the
bridges and deeper than trees that were washed away by the storm.

He was one of several people who gathered at the party headquarters last week,
to take a break from the new reality around them. And to grieve.

“You know, I know just about every person that lost their life,” he said. “There
were good friends of mine. They are part Democrat and part Republican, but they
were all good friends of mine.’

Politics has been put on the backburner, even for local candidates who could use
all the support they can get.

Jim Parlier is a Democrat running for county commission who lives in an
overwhelmingly Republican area of this overwhelmingly Republican county.

But his campaign and his viewpoints didn’t matter when it was time to clear
debris and move past the worst of the flooding.

“It didn't come up,” he said. “I have farmer neighbors who have bulldozers and
they were clearing the road and I was pulling brush from their chainsaws. We
didn't worry about who was in which party.”


You could call the shift in Yancey County bipartisanship, but it’s more like an anti-
partisanship that will likely linger far beyond November's election.

“I really think that because it's going to be a long recovery, a couple of years at
least, that we're going to stay together the way we have,” Parlier predicted.

He said he wanted to run for office to help people, and he’s been heartened to see
how much the last several weeks has been neighbors helping neighbors going on
with cleanup and distribution of aid.

He's worried about what happens after the outside attention wanes.

“I think we need to continue to feel the love,” Parlier said. “I think we need to
realize that from our helpers, both here and from the outside, that we're getting
great big hugs. That's what all of us need ... and certainly me.”

Campaigns pivot to GOTV to helping those in need

Hugs notwithstanding, there is still an election going on, and both presidential
campaigns are in a delicate position: trying to balance relief efforts with
encouraging people to vote in a state that both Vice President Harris and former
President Donald Trump need to win.

At an early voting site in Rutherfordton last week, Republican National Committee
Chair Michael Whatley, himself a western North Carolina native, said the party is
using its resources to reach people with helpful information.


“This is about the families of North Carolina,” he said. “This is about the people of
North Carolina first, that is obviously our highest priority and we'll deal with
elections as a distant second.”

The Harris campaign has also stepped into overdrive to deliver supplies to
affected communities and ensure people know their voting options.

Even though well over a million people have already voted in North Carolina, and
even though the North Carolina State Board of Elections passed rules to make
voting easier and more flexible in western counties affected by the storm, Yancey
County elections director Tipton is still worried about making sure her voters can
cast their ballots.

“But actually seeing that the people are interested, seeing them show up and
seeing them turn out: That's what I do this for,” she said. “It's them. That's what
you do, you provide it to your voters.”
